Tarn, protagonist, son of Rolg
Lawrence, human trader
Orvi, metalworker friend, son of Kog
Athzad, son of Valkold, king of Orehome
Peter, human cleric
[Bookie], elven librarian in Silverdale
[Circe], female swamp-elf wizard
[Elrond], chief of wood-elf village
, elemental

Orehome (Korbarthrond), Protag's city
Silverdale, human town
Riverwood, forest between Orehome and Hamlet that obscures the river
[Swampville], razed swamp-elf village
[Treeville], wood-elf village
"The Exiles", self-given name of Dwarven raiders.
Westport, the large human city in the region.

Sword name: Kildir
Filter name
Shield name?
Frost staff name?
Name of human language?
Adjective for human stuff (Elven, Dwarven, ? ... of Men? Mannish?  Human.)
    

    
Poems/songs
2. A healing prayer, by Peter to heal Protag's stomach wound.
3. About the faith, and the symbolism in the necklace.  By Peter to Protag.
4. A song about dwarves, their descent from giants, the inherited love of caves and living underground, and carving out one's own environment.  Remembered by Protag while sleeping in a muddy hole.
5. A poem about the city, the metal, how the metal was proven by stabbing a stagnated elemental, and how it was turned into a filter to save Orehome. 


    
Supernatural Aid
    Protag goes to the stable to hire a horse.  A cleric, Peter, overhears him, and asks to come with him to the city; travel is safer in a pair.  They travel together.  Peter gives him a small silver religious necklace to protect him for the journey.  Protag admires the craftsmanship but ignores the spiritual gobbledigook.
    
The Crossing of the First Threshold
    While camping one night, Protag and Peter are attacked by a band of goblins.  It is raining, which Protag is unaccustomed to.  Protag is surprised by their ferocity; he is used to civilised opponents, or wild beasts, but these are something different.  Unceasing and rabid, yet crafty.  The rain and the goblins make for a completely unknown and dangerous situation for Protag.  He considers just how wild the world is, and regrets leaving the comfort of the mountain.
    He manages to fight them off while Peter barely defends himself with his walking stick.  Protag kills one and chases the others away, but not before receiving a wound in his stomach.  Peter invokes the power of his god to heal the wound.  They take the dead goblin's dagger, plus some other artefact.
    
Belly of the Whale
    Protag and Peter return to their camp, to find the horses dead and their money stolen.  And the herbs.  Tired, wet and injured, they stumble through the woods looking for shelter from the rain.  Finding none, they leaned against a small ridge so they could at least sit up out of the mud.  Protag dug a bit out first, then finally rested, his back embraced by the wet dirt.  Still raining on them.
    Peter explains a bit about his faith, and what the necklace represents.  Maybe sings a song.  He's afraid of death, and the goblins really scared him.  Happy to have a dagger now, but to him it represents mortal danger.
    Protag talks about his quest.
    Protag closes his eyes, and finds comfort in his back being against the ground, in a "shelter" which he himself created, however small, however unsheltered from the rain.  A primal comfort.  Carving it out gives him a feeling of agency, in the middle of this chaos.  Maybe remembers a song about dwarves, giants, caves, etc.  He drifts to sleep.
    In the morning, they figure out what to do.  With no horses or money, they decide to press on directly towards the swamp, instead of going via the coast.  Peter wants to stick with Protag.
    
The Road of Trials
    What personal issues does he need to overcome?
    Inspired by his necklace to fight on.
    
    1. They follow a river downstream, hoping it will lead towards the swamp.  While walking, the water behaves strangely, swirling around, changing direction, swelling and subsiding, trickling up the bank and away from the river.  They approach with caution.
    Protag slowly puts his hand in the water, and withdraws it quickly remarking that it's icy cold.  Peter is speechless.  The river quickly returns to normal, as if in response.
    
    2. They find a dead dwarf.  Take the cowl, for Peter.  While examining the corpse, they are attacked by a swamp-elf wizard.  Protag blocks the spell with his shield just in time.
    They talk it out.  The Elf's broken Human language makes it hard for her to communicate with Protag, but Peter can understand her and acts as translator.  The swamp elves had been raided by dwarves a few generations earlier, and the animosity never subsided.  The entire village had been razed, and the sword stolen.  Elves now taking shelter with the nearby forest elves.
    
    The wizard, Circe, takes them to the wood-elf village, under arrest due to caution (Protag is a dwarf, after all).  Protag has never seen anything like it--everything is built in and out of trees, mushrooms and vines!  The chief, Elrond, believes their story.  He identifies the cowl as dwarf-made and slightly magical, and explains how frost elementals control water.  He tells them that the dwarven raiders now occupy the hills to the south.
    Elrond tells them that the sword was originally from an ancient, now gone, Dwarven city.  Tells them the sword's name, which is inscribed on it.  That the elves don't know how to use it, and as far as they know the Dwarves don't either—that knowledge is probably lost.  The elves are uninterested in helping, even for revenge, as it isn't important.  However, the wizard wishes to join them on their quest to take on the dwarves.  She believes that the Dwarves are up to something sinister, and that it is her duty to set it right, to balance the world.  Not personal.
    
    3. They depart, to find the Dwarves' hangout.  They head for the hills.  They are accosted by a pair of lookouts, and fight and win the day.  Tank, healer, dps.  They reach the hills and approach the gate.
    
The Meeting with the Goddess
    Peter is scared for his life, remembering that fear of death from the goblins (even though the fight with the scouts was much more straightforward).  He gave Protag his word to see it through, and needs to ask for strength to do so.  He asks Protag to pray with him, and he reluctantly agrees.
    While praying, an angel appears to Protag (though he doesn't know what it is, and nor will the reader be told).  A being of light, pure, beautiful, transcendent.  A soothing female voice.  A warm feeling of embrace.  She talks about Protag fulfilling his destiny, being moral, being brave, doing what he thinks is right.  It's obvious Protag doesn't know how to pray, but the intention is enough to demonstrate he's on the right path.  She tells him how to find the treasure room in the fortress.  She tells him that the wizard is right: the Dwarves are up to no good.
    "I believe I have just communed with your god"
    
Woman as the Temptress
    They enter the fortress.  Following the angel's instructions, they find the treasure room.  It is full of artefacts, Dwarven-made.  Functional and decorative.  All very old.  One such piece catches Protag's eye: a sword made of a shiny green alloy.  It's the most beautiful object he's ever held in his hands.  He reads the inscription and finds that it is the sword he's looking for.  Whether or not it does what it is purported to do, in this moment Protag is completely satisfied and happy.  He could give up now, go home, and still feel like he has accomplished a lifetime's worth of challenges, simply due to possession of such a fine artefact.
    Protag has no idea how to use the sword.  He'd need to ask the head Dwarf who stole it, but that would be a very dangerous confrontation.  He could instead leave now, with his life and with this sword.  Maybe he could figure it out on his own.  Maybe one of the other solutions to the water problem will work.  He's just one soldier, after all; why should the fate of the entire city rest on his shoulders?  In short, tempted to go home with the sword as a treasure, without really satisfying the quest.
    Ultimately, he sees his necklace in the sword's reflection, and decides to press on, sword in belt.
    
Atonement with the Father/Abyss
    They press on.  The tunnel becomes rough and natural, dank with wet patches on the ground.  The puddles grow larger, eventually streaming and trickling--uphill, back the way they came!.  They follow the flow of fetid water down, towards the source, around bends and through forks, until they find the water flowing from a large chamber.
    Here they find a frost elemental: Large, like living water pulsating and moving around.  Brown, algae growing, smelling putrid.  It screams at them in a gurgly sort of way.  Protag assumes this is one of the water-corrupting demons that the sword can smite, and builds up the courage to do so.  It's difficult to make this decision, as he is afraid he will lose the sword or it will break.  He plunges the sword into the thing.  And . . . from the point of the wound outwards, the water turns crystal clear, and crystalises into ice.  It's slow, like watching a black poison spread under the skin from a bite.  But it's obviously purifying the water.
    The elemental stops thrashing and screaming.  It twists and pulsates, but due to natural movement of the water rather than struggling.  Then it speaks.
    "I am a warden of the frosts and waters of the world.  The Dwarf captured me, to restore his sunken city from thousands of years ago in exchange for my freedom.  But I won't do it; I can't do it.  Being trapped in this cave has made me stagnate, but you have purified me.  Thank you.  I am still a prisoner here; my essence/soul is being held in a bottle, in the possession of the head Dwarf.  Get it, bring it to me, and I will be free."
    Protag removes the sword.
    
Apotheosis
    The team goes in search of the head Dwarf.  A group of guards ambush them.  Protag hastily grabs what weapon he can; the sword comes out from his belt into his hand.  He parries, and the sword clatters loudly and a large chip flies out.  Obviously this sword was not made for combat.  He grabs his hammer and continues the fight, alongside Peter and the wizard.  They finally slay the last guard, then stop to catch their breath.  Protag laments that the beautiful sword has been damaged, and looks around for the missing chunk.  He finds it in a puddle, purer than the other stagnant puddles around.  He then realises that it's not the sword that purifies water, but the constituent metal.
    Then he realises the true meaning behind the librarian's song; somehow it was about the metal all along.  He picks up the chunk.  So there is a solution to Orehome's problem.
    
The Ultimate Boon
    The team finds the head dwarf, a wizard himself.  He is furious, says that he was close to getting his ancestors' city back, that the elemental was about to break.
    He appeals to Protag's race, talking about the glory of what was lost.  Maybe even that it was sea giants who destroyed it (because they were jealous?).  Appeal to his love of fine craftsmanship; "that sword on your belt: what if there were more?  What if we could resurrect the nation that created it?"
    They fight.  The Dwarf uses frost magic, empowered by the Elemental's essence.  He targets the healer first, encasing him in ice.  He shoots the wizard through with shards of ice, leaving her punctured and bloody, writhing in pain.  He sprints to the Dwarf, blocking one frostbolt with his shield, dodging another, and leaping.  He strikes the Dwarf with his hammer at the same moment as a third frostbold hits him in the chest, winding him.
    Protag is lying on the floor recovering, but okay.  The Dwarf is mortally wounded by the hammer.  The wizard is mortally wounded, using the last of her energy to thaw out Peter.
    Dwarf: "I die, but you can still restore Atlantis!  This goal is bigger than any one of us.  Use the Elemental!"
    The wizard dies; Peter can't save her.
    Protag gets the elemental's trapped essence.  Peter loots the powerful frost staff.  They collect the wizard's belongings to return to her people.
    
Refusal of the Return
    Protag ponders what the Dwarf said: could the city be restored?  It sounds wonderful.  The power to do it might be right there.  And Orehome might find another solution to their problem.  Imagine resurrecting such an impressive city.  Imagine being the one to have done so.
    He returns to the Elemental, and asks him about whether it really can be done.  The answer: no.  A thousand Elementals could not exert enough power over the seas to lift an entire city from the seabed.  And even if it could be done, what then?  Hold it up indefinitely?  No, the Dwarf was mistaken.  He was driven mad with greed and nostalgia.
    Protag asks the Elemental about the sword, and his suspicions that its metal can purify water.  Also specifically about the problem in Orehome.  The Elemental identifies the problem, and confirms that the metal will work.
    Protag ultimately decides to free the Elemental.  Protag and Peter collects some treasure from the treasure room: gold coins (better value-to-weight ratio than the silver coins), Protag takes a particularly beautiful ancient Dwarven shield carved with a picture of the city before it sank.
    Protag, Peter and the Elemental return to the Elven village.
    
The Magic Flight
    At the village, they give the wizard's belongings to Elrond.  He identifies the staff and shield.
    The staff was made by the Dwarf, especially to channel the frost power of the Elemental.  It still carries some of that residual power, which Peter can learn to wield.
    The shield belonged to the Prince of Atlantis.  Ceremonial.  A special iron alloy that doesn't rust.
    Elrond gives Protag some seeds to give to the librarian for his garden, and a letter describing the adventure.
    The Elemental offers to carry Protag and Peter all the way back to the human town, via the rivers.  Peter politely refuses, saying he wants to spend some time with the elves before heading to his original destination, the human city.  Protag accept's the Elemental's offer.  During the journey he observes a number of settlements of Men, Goblin camps, but nothing as advanced or beautiful as he imagines the sunken city was.  He wonders if the city is lost for good; wonders if there was ever really a chance of restoring it.  Once they arrive, the Elemental thanks Protag once again for freeing him, and quickly departs.
    
Rescue from Without

The Crossing of the Return Threshold
    Protag gives the Hamlet librarian the letter and the seeds.  Shows him the sword and the shield.
    He hires a horse at the city gates, and gallops off towards the mountain.  He reaches it at sunset, drops off the horse at the Orehome branch of the stable company, and enters the gates.
    
Master of the Two Worlds
    He visits his friend Smith.  Tells him the story, and about the city, and shows him the sword.
    Gives the following spec:
     - maximise surface area
     - do justice to the craftsmanship of the original sword.
    Pays in gold coins.  Smith accepts only half payment, because of the benefit to the city.
    A few days later, Smith gives him two lovingly and expertly carved wooden boxes, both engraved with the same city picture as is on Protag's shield.
    The first is large and flat, 3'x3'x1'.  It contains a filter for the city's well.  Long tubes in a honeycomb pattern, making up a wide cylinder.  Designed to fit the well, such that all drinking water is forced to pass through it and come into contact with the special metal.  Its surface is engraved with the date, the names of its maker (Smith) and its commissioner (Protag), its purpose, and its name ().  "Forged from the sword blah blah, from Atlantis, etc.".  All this on the smooth cylindrical outer surface designed to fit snugly into the city's primary well.  The top surface is uneven: the hexagonal tubes are shaped like towers, such that the top surface appears like a model city, on a flat island.  Thus, when the filter is placed in the well, under the water, it will resemble the sunken city.
    The second box, Smith opens then holds out to Protag.  It is a small jewelry box, that can be held comfortably in Protag's hand.  Inside is a coin, made of the same green metal.  A small coin, because as much metal as possible needed to go into the filter, but this is something that Protag can keep, as a reminder of his adventures, and of the properties of the metal.  One side of the coin bears a picture of the Elemental.  The other side, again, lists the names of Smith and Protag.
    Inscribed inside the lids of both boxes is a poem, describing the story of the city, the metal, how it was proven by the elemental being stabbed, and how it was turned into a filter to save Orehome.
    The coin and poem were a surprise.
    Protag delivers the filter to the city plumbers' guild.
    
Freedom to Live
    Protag wakes up for a regular day of work.  He glances at the shield hanging on his wall: too beautiful to use, not part of his allowed uniform, and probably not as strong has his issued shield given that it was ceremonial.  But a reminder of his adventure.  Below it is a small shelf with the hilt of the sword, and the box with the coin, open.
    He puts on his uniform and heads to the mess hall.  With his breakfast he has a mug of beer, and then a mug of water, admiring its clean taste.  Atlantis may be gone, but its technology lives on in Orehome, keeping it afloat.  Beginning his day of work guarding the city, he can protect it and keep it alive, satisfying that part of him that wanted to restore Atlantis.